EIP-3374: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting (#3374)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-3374.md

---
eip: 3374

> title: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 title: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting
```
CI is blocking on the trailing whitespace.

>  title: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Predictable Proof-of-Work (POW) Sunsetting
```

> author: @Query0x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author: Query0x (@Query0x)
```

> discussions-to: <tbd>

Reviewer: This field is necessary.  I recommend creating a thread at https://ethereum-magicians.org/.  If you are unable or unwilling to do that, then a new issue in this repository for discussion is an acceptable (but not preferred) alternative.

Author: Tried signing up there but can't get past the confirmation email... requested it be resent three times.  Not in junk or spam.

Author: Done... what's one more email address

status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2021-03-13
---

## Simple Summary

> Provides for a predictable, issuance neutral reduction of block rewards to 1 over a one year time span while reducing the uncertainties and risks associated with sudden changes to mining economics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sets block reward to 3 and reduces it to 1 linearly over the course of about 1 year.
```
This summary doesn't do a good job of explaining what this *technical change* is.

## Abstract
Sets the block reward to 3 ETH and then incrementally decreases it every block for 2,362,000 blocks (approximately 1 year) until it reaches 1 ETH.

## Motivation
Unnecessarily abrupt changes to the Ethereum ecosystem cause disruption and disharmony resulting in the disenfranchisement of community members while undermining stability and confidence.  While moves from Proof-of-Work to Proof-of-Stake will undoubtedly cause friction between those community members vested in either, all benefit from a measured, predictable transition.

> This proposal:

Reviewer: EIPs do not propose, they assert.  Write the EIP targeting a reader in 5 years long after this EIP is implemented.

Author: This EIP had better be irrelevant five years from now...

> 1) Is issuance neutral.  There is no overall increase in mining rewards.

Reviewer: This is not true.  It is issuance neutral over 1 year, it is net negative issuance beyond that (relative to current).  Also, EIPs should try to be worded in a way that avoids comparing it to the current state of things and instead should focus on addressing why this way is a good way on its own (regardless of current system).  Sometimes this isn't possible, but in this case I think this line isn't adding technical merit as it is.

Author: It is issuance neutral over the proposed timeframe it is in effect.  I think it is important to be unambiguous about that point given community comments to eip-3368.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1) Is issuance neutral over 1 year, and reduces issuance beyond that.
```
The current text is incorrect without bounding on the time frame.  This proposal *decreases* issuance over any time span longer than 1 year.

Reviewer: > given community comments to eip-3368.
Keep in mind, EIPs are technical documents, they are not an appropriate place for arguments.  The motivation section's only purpose is to give people a high level overview of why this change is desirable, it is not meant to be an exhaustive argument in favor of a particular EIP nor counter every point of opposition heard in the wild.

It does need to be *technically correct* though, which is why I'm pressing on changing the current wording (which is technically incorrect).

> 2) Smooths the immediate impact of [EIP-1559](./eip-1559) on mining economics reducing the likeihood of reactionary responses;

Reviewer: This change is not dependent on EIP-1559 and thus that shouldn't be mentioned.  If it is included along side EIP-1559 that is a governance decision separate from the technical specification.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why you marked this as resolved.  This change is not dependent on 1559 (on a technical level) and thus shouldn't be referencing it.  If you want to propose this be included along side 1559 that is totally fine, and this line may be an argument in favor of that, but it isn't appropriate for the technical specification.

Keep in mind that this EIP could be applicable without EIP-1559 such as in the face of a change in block times, or a sharp drop in price, etc.

3) Introduces an ongoing, predictable reduction in future mining rewards down to 1, effectively "sunsetting" POW and codifying the move to POS;

> 4) Removes economic incentives for continued development of ASICs;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4) Reduces economic incentives for continued development of ASICs;
```

5) Allows the impacts of decreasing miner rewards to be measured and monitored rather than relying on conjecture and game theory, so adjustments can be made if necessary.

## Specification

> Adjust block, uncle, and nephew rewards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This change only affects block rewards.  Also, this line doesn't serve any purpose as is.

> 6) Moves us one step closer to world peace and a more harmonious Ethereum ecosystem.

Reviewer: While humorous, this line isn't adding value to the EIP so should be removed.

Author: Noted... I'll remove it but, for the record, I'm against not striving for world peace and a harmonious Ethereum ecosystem.

> 6) Moves us one step closer to world peace and a more harmonious Ethereum ecosystem.

Reviewer: Consider copying the motivation from https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3368, which is exactly the same.  That EIP's motivation does a good job of focusing on the technical aspects and staying away from governance and politics (like ASICs vs GPUs, EIP-1559, etc.).

Author: Took the time to carefully review the motivations of 3368.  Respectfully, this EIP only makes sense in the context of 1559 and period of time leading up to the transition to POS.  I'd prefer to leave the motivations as specified.

### Constants
* `TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER: TBD`
* `TRANSITION_DURATION: 2_362_000` // (about one year)
* `TRANSITION_END_BLOCK_NUMBER: FORK_BLOCK_NUMBER + TRANSITION_DURATION`
* `STARTING_REWARD: 3_000_000_000_000_000_000`
* `ENDING_REWARD: 1_000_000_000_000_000_000`
* `REWARD_DELTA: STARTING_REWARD - ENDING_REWARD`
### Block Reward
```py
if block.number >= TRANSITION_END_BLOCK_NUMBER:
    block_reward = ENDING_REWARD
elif block.number >= TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER:
    block_reward = STARTING_REWARD - REWARD_DELTA * TRANSITION_DURATION / (block.number - TRANSITION_START_BLOCK_NUMBER)
```

## Rationale

> This proposal smooths the effect of EIP-1559 on mining economics, without affecting the fee burn or increasing total ETH issuance, and mitigates the risks and uncertainties that sudden changes to mining economics impart on network security.  Temporarily raising the mining reward to 3 blunts the initial impact of EIP-1559 and the continual reductions thereafter codify Ethereum's move to POS by increasingly disincentivizing POW.  Importantly, this approach moderates the rate of change so impacts and threats can be measured and monitored.

Reviewer: The Rationale is a place where you explain why certain specific values or choices were made.  The content currently in here is better fit for the motivation section rather than the rationale section.  3 good things to have subsections in the Rational for are why each of the constants were chosen.
```suggestions
### 2,362,000 block transition
<briefly explain why this number was chosen instead of any other>

### 3 ETH starting reward
<briefly explain why 3 ETH was chosen instead of any other value>

### 1 ETH ending reward
<briefly explain why 1 ETH was chosen instead of any other value>
```

> This proposal smooths the effect of EIP-1559 on mining economics, without affecting the fee burn or increasing total ETH issuance, and mitigates the risks and uncertainties that sudden changes to mining economics impart on network security.  Picking starting and ending block reward values that are equidistant from the current block reward rate of 2 ensures the impact of this EIP will be issuance neutral over the one year time frame.  Temporarily raising the block reward to 3 blunts the initial impact of EIP-1559 and the continual reductions thereafter codify Ethereum's move to POS by increasingly disincentivizing POW.  Importantly, this approach moderates the rate of change so impacts and threats can be measured and monitored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Picking starting and ending block reward values that are equidistant from the current block reward rate of 2 ensures the impact of this EIP will be issuance neutral over the one year time frame.  Temporarily raising the block reward to 3 blunts the initial impact of a sudden miner revenue decrease and the continual reductions thereafter codify Ethereum's move to POS by increasingly disincentivizing POW.  Importantly, this approach moderates the rate of change so impacts and threats can be measured and monitored.
```
The first sentence is not appropriate for the Rationale, it should be part of Motivation.  That being said, as mentioned in the motivation this EIP shouldn't be tied to EIP-1559.
